# Git 101

Git is a version control system. Version control is used to create a history of versions of a **repo** (repository). A repository is collection of files all within a single directory and it's sub-directories, like a single code-base. The history is made of **commits**, a commit defines a new version of the files. So when a repo is created, it has zero commits. When making the first commit, you have your first version of the code. Each subsequent commit is an additional version. Included with each commit is a message from the user to describe what the commit includes. Something like: `"Add a header to the homepage"`.

Versioning has the obvious advantage of referring to previous versions when something goes wrong. But the real power (and confusion) comes in when we start to share code.

If two people are working on the same code, our code will diverge, then we will each have a commit for `V5`, git provides a method to **merge** two V5's into V5 and V6.

So what happens if both of our V5's changes were in the same file, or even on the exact same line in the file? How does git deal with determining who's code to use?

Git can determine this automatically in many cases, git actually tracks every line of everyfile, so if you edit line 8 and I edit line 22, git could automatially merge these two commits. So what happens if we both edit line 8? Git will make you deal with the merge manually through a **merge conflict**.

Let's pull all of these ideas together on the whiteboard.

<hr>

There is another large feature we need to talk about before diving in to git. Files within a git repo can exist in at least 4 states:

- Untracked
- Modified
- Staged
- Commited

The first and last are pretty straight forward, `untracked` is a file that has never been committed, once you've committed it once, it will never be untracked again. `commited` means that the file has been commited and doesn't have any changes since. This context makes `modified` pretty obvious, a commited file which has been changed since the last commit but has not yet been commited again. So what is `staged`? Let's talk about a scenario which highlights it's use.

Let say are adding a new feature, let's say a search feature, to a website, but you notice there is a typo in one of the main pages of the site, you go ahead and fix that typo. So you want to commit so that you can deploy the fixed typo as soon as possible, but you still have the half-completed changes (only a search box, nothing happens when you search). You don't want to commit those changes, by default if you have modified files and you commit, they will not be included in the commit. You first have to `stage` the files you want to commit, so the correct thing to do would be to stage the single file with the typo, and then commit, now you still have the (unstaged) modified files for your search feature.

## How To

Let walk through the steps of creating a git repo then staging and commiting files.

```bash

# Creates a directory
mkdir learn-git

# Moves into the directory
cd learn-git

# Initialize a git repo in the current directory
# Any file or subdirectory is included
git init

# opens a new file in Atom
# Make some changes and save the file
atom test.rb

# Outputs the current status of this repo
# Currently you will have 1 untracked file
git status

# Stage the file in git
# Untracked -> Staged
# New files skip the `modified` status
git add test.rb

# Creates a commit, V1 of the code
# staged -> commited
git commit -m "Add a test file"

# Re-open the file in Atom
# Make additional changes
# commited -> modified
atom test.rb

# Now the status should show one modified file
git status

# stage the file
# modified -> staged
git add test.rb

# Commit the change, V2 of the code.
# staged -> commited
git commit -m "Update the test file"

```

## Resources

[Git Cheat Sheet](https://education.github.com/git-cheat-sheet-education.pdf)
[Good Resources for Git & Github](https://help.github.com/articles/good-resources-for-learning-git-and-github/)
